# FilmQueryProject

# Description

The project for Week 7 is all about allowing the user to perform film queries. As the application launches, the user is greeted with a title screen and main menu with three options: Query by film id, query by search word, and exit application.

When the user selects option one, they are prompted to enter a numeric film id. This film id then replaces the bind variable in a SQL query and retrieves minor details regarding the film's title, description, release year, rating, language, and cast. The cast is called through a separate method which instantiates and populates a list with actors by iterating through all actors associated with the chosen film id through a separate SQL query. At this point, a sub menu will appear automatically with an additional two options: See all film details, and return to main menu. If the user chooses option one, the film's basic data will be redisplayed along with additional details such as: film id, rental duration, rental rate, length, replacement cost, special features, and category. The category, much like the actor, is a class of its own. Another method is called which executes a unique SQL query and retrieves relevant data from both the category id and name columns.

When the user selects option two, they are prompted to enter a word to search through the film titles and description by keyword. A SQL query is executed and if there is match in a film's title or description columns, a new film object is instantiated, that film's data is retrieved from the database and then assigned to the associated fields inherited from the Film class. Much like option one where we searched for an individual film based on a film id provided by the user, searching by keyword also provides the user a sub menu for the option to look at more details for each of the films. The only difference being that the method from the first sub menu takes in a scanner and film id as arguments, while the second sub menu method must take in a scanner and a list of films. This is to ensure that all films in the list display each of their attributes.

Finally, the last option is exiting the application.

# Technologies Used
Java, Eclipse, SQL, Git, GitHub, Atom, MAMP, Maven

# Lessons Learned

Overall, this was an excellent project. It helped to better solidify my understanding of some of the basics (creating classes, instantiating objects, overloading/overriding methods, creating and populating lists, throwing exceptions, and reading stack traces). Since this project incorporated SQL database queries, I also became more familiar with the process of using a database. From accessing databases in terminal via mysql commands, to formulating sql queries by mapping out paths to chain different tables together. At first this seem very complex, but after further observation I was able to better understand the importance of primary and foreign keys and the roles they play navigating around a database. Finding corresponding primary and foreign keys allow developers to access the data of more than one table at a time. Moreover, these SQL queries allow us to not only pull the data from databases, but also order it in different ways such as ascending and descending. Finally, I was able to clear up some of my confusion around the "boilerplate" code for these types of queries. This includes declaring and initializing a URL String with the address to the a given database, overriding methods and populating them with the required fields (username, password, and sql query syntax with one or more bind variables), using the aforementioned credentials to establish a connection with the desired database, create a PreparedStatement that takes in our sql query as an argument, concatenate methods to our PreparedStatement variable that takes in the bind variable index and a datatype, execute the query and populate a ResultSet with the results, and finally, we iterate through the data, creating new objects and setting each of its fields with the relative data. This project most certainly made me a better developer.
